# Unit VI: **Planning**

## Automated Planning

*   Automated planning and scheduling, sometimes denoted as simply AI planning, is a branch of artificial intelligence that concerns the realization of strategies or action sequences, typically for execution by intelligent agents, autonomous robots and unmanned vehicles. Unlike classical control and classification problems, the solutions are complex and must be discovered and optimized in multidimensional space. Planning is also related to decision theory.

*   In known environments with available models, planning can be done offline. Solutions can be found and evaluated prior to execution. In dynamically unknown environments, the strategy often needs to be revised online. Models and policies must be adapted. Solutions usually resort to iterative trial and error processes commonly seen in artificial intelligence. These include dynamic programming, reinforcement learning and combinatorial optimization. Languages used to describe planning and scheduling are often called action languages.

*   [More Details](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automated_planning_and_scheduling)

## Classical Planning

*   Classical Planning is the planning where an agent takes advantage of the problem structure to construct complex plans of an action. The agent performs three tasks in classical planning:
    *   Planning: The agent plans after knowing what is the problem.
    *   Acting: It decides what action it has to take.
    *   Learning: The actions taken by the agent make him learn new things.

*   [More Details](https://www.tutorialandexample.com/classical-planning)

*   NEEDS REFACTORING

<!-- TODO - Refactoring -->

### Algorithms for Classical Planning

*   NEEDS REFACTORING

<!-- TODO - Refactoring -->

## Heuristics for Planning

## Hierarchical Planning

## Planning and Acting in Nondeterministic Domains

## Time,

## Schedules

## Resources

## Analysis of Planning Approaches

<!-- TODO: Refactoring -->

## Limits of AI

There are certain facets of AI development that have made entry into this field
very restrictive. Given the cost, engineering and hardware needs, AI development
poses significant capital requirements thus creating high barriers of entry.

1.  **Access to Data:** For prediction or decision models to be trained properly,
    they need data. As many people have put it, data is now one of the most
    sought-after commodities ousting oil.

2.  **Bias:** Biased AI is much more nuanced than just tainted data. There are
    many stages of the deep-learning process that bias can slip through and
    currently, our standard design procedures simply aren't aptly equipped to
    identify them.

3.  **Computing Time:** Even though technological advancements have been rapidly
    extending in recent years, there are still some hardware limitations like
    limited computation resources (for RAM and GPU cycles) that we have to
    overcome.

4.  **Cost:** Mining, storing and analyzing data will be very costly both in
    terms of energy and hardware use.

5.  **Adversarial Attacks:** Since AI isn't human, it isn't exactly equipped to
    adapt to deviations in circumstances. For example, simply applying tape on
    the wrong side of the road can cause an autonomous vehicle to swerve into the
    wrong lane and crash. A human might not even register or react to the tape.
    While in normal conditions the autonomous vehicle may be far safer, it is
    these outlier cases that we need to be worried about.

6.  **No Consensus on Safety, Ethics, and Privacy:** Most critics of AI argue
    along lines of the ethics of implementing it, not just in terms of how it
    makes privacy a forgotten concept, but also philosophically.

[More Details](https://hackernoon.com/the-missing-pieces-6-limitations-of-ai-s85r3upr)

## Ethics of AI

*   AI ethics is a system of moral principles and techniques intended to inform
    the development and responsible use of artificial intelligence technology. As
    AI has become integral to products and services, organizations are starting to
    develop AI codes of ethics.

*   An AI code of ethics, also called an AI value platform, is a policy statement
    that formally defines the role of artificial intelligence as it applies to the
    continued development of the human race. The purpose of an AI code of ethics
    is to provide stakeholders with guidance when faced with an ethical decision
    regarding the use of artificial intelligence.

*   Isaac Asimov, the science fiction writer, foresaw the potential dangers of
    autonomous AI agents long before their development and created The Three Laws
    of Robotics as a means of limiting those risks. In Asimov's code of ethics,
    the first law forbids robots from actively harming humans or allowing harm to
    come to humans by refusing to act. The second law orders robots to obey humans
    unless the orders are not in accordance with the first law. The third law
    orders robots to protect themselves insofar as doing so is in accordance with
    the first two laws.

*   The rapid advancement of AI in the past five to 10 years has spurred groups of
    experts to develop safeguards for protecting against the risk of AI to humans.
    One such group is the nonprofit institute founded by MIT cosmologist Max
    Tegmark, Skype co-founder Jaan Tallinn and DeepMind research scientist
    Victoria Krakovna. The institute worked with AI researchers and developers as
    well as scholars from many disciplines to create the 23 guidelines now
    referred to as the Asilomar AI Principles.

*   [More Details](https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/definition/AI-code-of-ethics)

## Future of AI

*   AI is likely to have a strong impact on certain sectors in particular:

    *   **Medical:** The potential benefits of utilizing AI in the field of
        medicine are already being explored. The medical industry has a robust
        amount of data, which can be utilized to create predictive models related
        to healthcare. Additionally, AI has shown to be more effective than
        physicians in certain diagnostic contexts.

    *   **Automotive:** We’re already seeing how AI is impacting the world of
        transportation and automobiles with the advent of autonomous vehicles and
        autonomous navigation. AI will also have a major impact on manufacturing,
        including within the automotive sector.

    *   **Cybersecurity:** Cybersecurity is front of mind for many business
        leaders, especially considering the spike in cybersecurity breaches
        throughout 2020. Attacks rose 600% during the pandemic as hackers
        capitalized on people working from home, on less secure technological
        systems and Wi-Fi networks. AI and machine learning will be critical tools
        in identifying and predicting threats in cybersecurity. AI will also be a
        crucial asset for security in the world of finance, given that it can
        process large amounts of data to predict and catch instances of fraud.

    *   **E-Commerce:** AI will play a pivotal role in e-commerce in the future,
        in every sector of the industry from user experience to marketing to
        fulfillment and distribution. We can expect that moving forward, AI will
        continue to drive e-commerce, including through the use of chat-bots,
        shopper personalization, image-based targeting advertising, and warehouse
        and inventory automation.

*   AI can have a big impact on the job search:

    *   If you are moving forward with the hope that a hiring manager may give you
        the benefit of the doubt on a small misstep within the application, you
        might be in for a rude awakening. AI already plays a major role in the
        hiring process, so much so that up to 75% of resumes are rejected by an
        automated applicant tracking system, or ATS, before they even reach a
        human being.

    *   In the past, recruiters have had to devote considerable time to poring
        over resumes to look for relevant candidates. Data from LinkedIn shows
        that recruiters can spend up to 23 hours looking over resumes for one
        successful hire.

*   [More
    Details](https://www.forbes.com/sites/gradsoflife/2022/03/29/a-commitment-to-diversity-wont-necessarily-move-the-needle-on-change/?sh=302b5a3f661f)

## AI Components

## AI Architectures
