## Unit V: Security in Cloud Computing

## Risks in Cloud Computing

### Risk Management

*   Risk management is one of the cloud computing environment controls which
    aims to assess and manage risks related to cloud computing and to prevent
    those risks from impacting.

*   The risk-based approach of managing information systems is a holistic
    activity that needs to be fully integrated into every aspect of the
    organization, from planning to system development life cycle processes, to
    security controls allocation and continuous monitoring. Therefore, a Risk
    Management Framework (RMF) provides a disciplined and structured process
    that integrates information security and risk management activities into the
    system development life cycle. An RMF operates primarily at tier 3 in the
    risk management hierarchy, but it can also have interactions at tier 1 and
    tier 2.

<!-- TODO: Do I need to add more? -->

### Enterprise-Wide Risk Management

*   Enterprise-wide risk management (ERM) is a process of coordinated risk
    management that places greater emphasis on co-operation among departments to
    manage an organisation's range of risks as a whole. ERM offers a framework
    to effectively manage uncertainty, respond to risk and exploit opportunities
    as they arise.

*   Five steps to ERM are:

    1.  Identify Risk
    2.  Analyze Risk
    3.  Evaluate or Rank Risk
    4.  Treat Risk or Control Risk
    5.  Monitor and Review Risk

*   [More
    Details](https://kmrdpartners.com/2018/04/05/enterprise-risk-management-process/)

### Types of Risks in Cloud Computing

1.  **Data Loss:** Data loss is the most common cloud security risks of cloud
    computing. It is also known as data leakage. Data loss is the process in which
    data is being deleted, corrupted, and unreadable by a user, software, or
    application. In a cloud computing environment, data loss occurs when our
    sensitive data is somebody else's hands, one or more data elements can not be
    utilized by the data owner, hard disk is not working properly, and software is
    not updated.

2.  **Hacked Interfaces and Insecure APIs:** As we all know, cloud computing is
    completely depends on Internet, so it is compulsory to protect interfaces and
    APIs that are used by external users. APIs are the easiest way to communicate
    with most of the cloud services. In cloud computing, few services are available
    in the public domain. These services can be accessed by third parties, so there
    may be a chance that these services easily harmed and hacked by hackers.

3.  **Data Breach:** Data Breach is the process in which the confidential data
    is viewed, accessed, or stolen by the third party without any authorization, so
    organization's data is hacked by the hackers.

4.  **Vendor lock-in:** Vendor lock-in is the of the biggest security risks in
    cloud computing. Organizations may face problems when transferring their
    services from one vendor to another. As different vendors provide different
    platforms, that can cause difficulty moving one cloud to another.

5.  **Increased complexity strains IT staff:** Migrating, integrating, and
    operating the cloud services is complex for the IT staff. IT staff must require
    the extra capability and skills to manage, integrate, and maintain the data to
    the cloud.

6.  **Spectre & Meltdown:** Spectre & Meltdown allows programs to view and steal
    data which is currently processed on computer. It can run on personal computers,
    mobile devices, and in the cloud. It can store the password, your personal
    information such as images, emails, and business documents in the memory of
    other running programs.

7.  **Denial of Service (DoS) attacks:** Denial of service (DoS) attacks occur
    when the system receives too much traffic to buffer the server. Mostly, DoS
    attackers target web servers of large organizations such as banking sectors,
    media companies, and government organizations. To recover the lost data, DoS
    attackers charge a great deal of time and money to handle the data.

8.  **Account hijacking:** Account hijacking is a serious security risk in cloud
    computing. It is the process in which individual user's or organization's cloud
    account (bank account, e-mail account, and social media account) is stolen by
    hackers. The hackers use the stolen account to perform unauthorized activities.

## Data Security in Cloud

*   The core principles of information security and data governance—data
    confidentiality, integrity, and availability (known as the CIA triad)—also
    apply to the cloud:
    *   **Confidentiality:** protecting the data from unauthorized access and
        disclosure
    *   **Integrity:** safeguard the data from unauthorized modification so it
        can be trusted
    *   **Availability:** ensuring the data is fully available and accessible
        when it’s needed

### Security Issues

1.  **Data Loss:** Data Loss is one of the issues faced in Cloud Computing. This
    is also known as Data Leakage. As we know that our sensitive data is in the
    hands of Somebody else, and we don’t have full control over our database. So if
    the security of cloud service is to break by hackers then it may be possible
    that hackers will get access to our sensitive data or personal files.

2.  **Interference of Hackers and Insecure API’s:** As we know if we are talking
    about the cloud and its services it means we are talking about the Internet.
    Also, we know that the easiest way to communicate with Cloud is using API. So it
    is important to protect the Interface’s and API’s which are used by an external
    user. But also in cloud computing, few services are available in the public
    domain. An is the vulnerable part of Cloud Computing because it may be possible
    that these services are accessed by some third parties. So it may be possible
    that with the help of these services hackers can easily hack or harm our data.

3.  **User Account Hijacking:** Account Hijacking is the most serious security
    issue in Cloud Computing. If somehow the Account of User or an Organization is
    hijacked by Hacker. Then the hacker has full authority to perform Unauthorized
    Activities.

4.  **Changing Service Provider:** Vendor lock In is also an important Security
    issue in Cloud Computing. Many organizations will face different problems while
    shifting from one vendor to another. For example, An Organization wants to shift
    from AWS Cloud to Google Cloud Services then they ace various problem’s like
    shifting of all data, also both cloud services have different techniques and
    functions, so they also face problems regarding that. Also, it may be possible
    that the charges of AWS are different from Google Cloud, etc.

5.  **Lack of Skill:** While working, shifting o another service provider, need
    an extra feature, how to use a feature, etc. are the main problems caused in IT
    Company who doesn’t have skilled Employee. So it requires a skilled person to
    work with cloud Computing.

6.  **Denial of Service (DoS) attack:** This type of attack occurs when the
    system receives too much traffic. Mostly DoS attacks occur in large
    organizations such as the banking sector, government sector, etc. When a DoS
    attack occurs data is lost. So in order to recover data, it requires a great
    amount of money as well as time to handle it.

### Challenges

1.  **DDoS and Denial-of-Service Attacks:** As more and more businesses and
    operations move to the cloud, cloud providers are becoming a bigger target for
    malicious attacks. Distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks are more common
    than ever before. Verisign reported IT services, cloud platforms (PaaS) and SaaS
    was the most frequently targeted industry during the first quarter of 2015.

2.  **Data breaches:** Known data breaches in the U.S. hit a record-high of 738
    in 2014, according to the Identity Theft Research Center, and hacking was (by
    far) the number one cause. That’s an incredible statistic and only emphasizes
    the growing challenge to secure sensitive data.

3.  **Data loss:** When business critical information is moved into the cloud,
    it’s understandable to be concerned with its security. Losing cloud data, either
    through accidental deletion and human error, malicious tampering including the
    installation of malware (i.e. DDoS), or an act of nature that brings down a
    cloud service provider, could be disastrous for an enterprise business. Often a
    DDoS attack is only a diversion for a greater threat, such as an attempt to
    steal or delete data.

4.  **Insecure access control points:** One of the great benefits of the cloud
    is it can be accessed from anywhere and from any device. But, what if the
    interfaces and particularly the application programming interfaces (APIs) users
    interact with aren’t secure? Hackers can find and gain access to these types of
    vulnerabilities and exploit authentication via APIs if given enough time.

5.  **Notifications and alerts:** Awareness and proper communication of security
    threats is a cornerstone of network security and the same goes for cloud
    computing security. Alerting the appropriate website or application managers as
    soon as a threat is identified should be part of a thorough data security and
    access management plan. Speedy mitigation of a threat relies on clear and prompt
    communication so steps can be taken by the proper entities and impact of the
    threat minimized.

### Advantages

1.  **24×7 Visibility:** The best cloud security solutions like AppTrana enable
    24×7 monitoring of the application and cloud-based assets. This helps
    organizations to have continuous visibility into their risk posture and its
    impact on the business.

2.  **Higher Availability:** Cloud computing security solutions typically have
    built-in redundancies to ensure that the application/ resources are always
    available. The CDNs used have distributed global networks of edge servers that
    deliver content optimally, accelerate application performance, and minimize
    access to the server. Together, they handle traffic surges in a way that
    on-premises/ hardware solutions cannot.

3.  **Effective protection against DDoS Attacks:** Cloud security solutions
    provide the most effective protection against DDoS attacks, which are increasing
    in numbers, magnitude, sophistication, and severity. Cloud computing security
    helps to continuously monitor, identify, analyze, and mitigate DDoS attacks. The
    built-in redundancies, customizability, flexibility, scalability, and
    intelligence of such solutions can prevent volumetric, low, and slow attacks.

4.  **Data Security:** The best cloud computing security solutions provide data
    security by design. They have security protocols and policies such as strong
    access controls and data encryption to prevent unauthorized entities from
    accessing confidential information.

5.  **Pay as you Go Model:** The cloud security model ensures that you pay only
    for what you use and consume as opposed to making any upfront investment.

6.  **Advanced Threat Detection:** By using end-point scanning and global threat
    intelligence, cloud computing security can detect threats more easily.

7.  **Regulatory Compliance:** Top-notch cloud application security providers
    help to ensure regulatory standards and industry-specific compliance needs. This
    is done through its enhanced infrastructure and managed security services.

### Disadvantages

1.  **Risk of data confidentiality:** There is always a risk that user data can
    be accessed by other people. So data and cloud protection must be good because
    if it won’t be dangerous for data confidentiality.

2.  **Depends on internet connection:** The internet is the only way to cloud
    computing. When there is no internet connection in your place, or the internet
    path to the cloud provider is in trouble, automatically access to your cloud
    computing machine will be disconnected. Now this is where the biggest obstacle
    is happening in developing countries and remote areas that do not have good
    internet access.And the weakness of public cloud is where everyone accesses the
    same server and server and will increase the risk of attack, and down the
    server.

3.  **The level of security:** Secrecy and security are among the most doubtful
    things in cloud computing. By using a cloud computing system means we are fully
    entrusted with the security and confidentiality of data to companies that
    provide cloud computing servers. When you experience a problem, you cannot sue
    the server for errors in the data. When you experience a problem, you cannot sue
    the server for errors in the data.

4.  **Compliance:** Which refers to the risk of a level compliance deviation
    from the provider against the regulations applied by the user.

5.  **Vulnerable in the event of an attack:** There are lots of arguments
    against cloud computing one of which is computing because the Cloud Computing
    work system is online, each component that is on Cloud Computing can be exposed
    to a wide range, this is a wide open opportunity for attacks on data or
    activities stored on the server. When an attack is carried out by hackers, the
    problems that occur are data security, and data privacy.

6.  **Data Mobility:** which refers to the possibility of sharing data between
    cloud services and how to retrieve data if one day the user makes a process of
    terminating cloud computing services.And there is local storage where the data
    can be used at any time as needed.

7.  **Technical problem:** Besides that the use of Cloud Computing makes you
    unable to manage it yourself when there is a problem or a problem, you must
    contact customer support who is not necessarily ready 24/7. This is a problem
    because for some support you also have to pay more money.

8.  **Low Connection:** Does not work well if the connection is slow. The
    quality of cloud computing servers is one of the most important considerations
    before we decide to provide cloud computing server service providers. When the
    server is down or the permorma is not good, we will be harmed because of poor
    server quality.

### Cloud Digital persona and Data security

<!-- TODO: Do I need to add RMF? -->

### Content Level Security

*   Content Level Security (CLS) is a feature that controls who has access to
    edit or read content. During the process of creating a document, the content
    goes through several stages. Each stage requires input from users with
    different roles.

## Cloud Security Services

1.  **Identity and access:** You are provided with control for secured
    management of identities and access. It includes people, processes and systems
    used for managing access to your enterprise resources. It is managed by making
    sure that the identity of the user is verified and the access rights are
    provided at the correct level.

2.  **Data loss prevention:** This service offers protection of data by
    providing you with pre-installed data loss prevention software, along with a set
    of rules deployed.

3.  **Web security:** Web security is provided as an additional protection
    against malware from entering the enterprise through web browsing and other such
    activities. This cloud service is provided either by installing a software or an
    appliance or through the cloud by redirecting your web traffic over to the cloud
    provider.

4.  **E-mail security:** It provides control over the in-bound and out-bound
    e-mails to protect your organization from malicious attachments and phishing.
    This cloud service helps enforce corporate policies such as acceptable use, spam
    and in providing business continuity options. One of the solution adopted by
    many cloud e-mail security services is digital signatures, which allows
    identification and non-repudiation.

5.  **Security assessment:** There are various tools implemented for the users
    of the SaaS delivery model, such as variant elasticity, low administration
    overhead, negligible setup time and pay-per use with low investment in the
    initial stage.

6.  **Intrusion management:** It is the process that uses pattern recognition
    for detection and reaction to events that are statistically unusual and
    unexpected. It may also require reconfiguration of your system components in
    real time so as to prevent an intrusion.

7.  **Security information and managing events:** Your system gathers
    information related to log and events. This information is used in correlating
    and analyzing, to provide you with real time reporting and alerts on events that
    require intervention.

8.  **Encryption:** There are typical algorithms that are computationally
    difficult or nearly impossible to break.

9.  **Disaster management:** This cloud service helps in continuing your
    business and managing disasters by providing flexibility and reliable failover
    for services that are required in case of service interruptions.

10. **Network security:** The network security services provides you with
    address security controls, which in a cloud environment is generally provided
    through virtual devices.

### Confidentiality

*   Data confidentiality is the process of protecting data from illegal access
    and disclosure from the outsourced server and unauthorized users. This is
    done by encrypting the data so that only the authorized users can decrypt
    it.

<!-- TODO: More? -->

### Integrity and Availability

*   **Integrity:** Protect the data from the unauthorized insert, update, or
    delete. The data owner and authorized users should be able to recognize if
    the data is corrupted or incomplete, and receive the most recent updated
    version of the data, which guarantees accuracy and consistency of data.

*   **Availability:** The data in the cloud servers should be accessible to its
    users. Major threats to availability are denial of service (DOS) attacks,
    natural disasters, and equipment failures at the service provider’s end.

### Security Authorization Challenges in the Cloud

<!-- TODO -->

### Secure Cloud Software Requirements

1.  **Top-of-the-Line Perimeter Firewall:** Most firewalls are very simple—they
    typically inspect a packet’s source and destination and that’s all. Some more
    advanced firewalls feature stable packet inspection, which checks the integrity
    of the file packets for stability issues prior to approving or rejecting the
    packet.

2.  **Intrusion Detection Systems with Event Logging:** Numerous IT security
    compliance standards require businesses to have a means of tracking and
    recording intrusion attempts. So, for any business that wants to meet compliance
    standards such as PCI or HIPAA, using IDS event logging solutions is a must.

3.  **Internal Firewalls for Individual Applications, and Databases:** While
    having a strong perimeter firewall can block external attacks, internal attacks
    are still a major threat. Infrastructures that lack internal firewalls to
    restrict access to sensitive data and applications cannot be considered secure.

4.  **Data-at-Rest Encryption:** Encrypting the data that is stored on your
    cloud infrastructure can be an effective way to keep your most sensitive
    information from being accessed by the wrong party.

5.  **Tier IV Data Centers with Strong Physical Security:** The physical
    hardware used to run a cloud environment represents one last opportunity for
    hackers and industrial spies to steal your most important data. When allowed
    direct access to the hardware that runs the cloud, hackers have free reign to
    steal data or upload malware directly to your systems.

### Secure Cloud Software Testing

*   Cloud penetration testing is designed to assess the strengths and weaknesses
    of a cloud system to improve its overall security posture. Cloud penetration
    testing helps to: Identify risks, vulnerabilities, and gaps. Impact of
    exploitable vulnerabilities. Determine how to leverage any access obtained
    via exploitation.

*   [More
    Details](https://www.guidepointsecurity.com/education-center/cloud-penetration-testing/)
