# Unit VI: **Ruby and Rails**

## Introduction to Ruby

*   **Ruby** is an open-source programming language. It is also referred to as
    scripting language that is dynamic, interpreted and object-oriented as well.

*   Ruby is dynamically typed and uses garbage collection and just-in-time
    compilation. It supports multiple programming paradigms, including procedural,
    object-oriented, and functional programming. According to the creator, Ruby
    was influenced by Perl, Smalltalk, Eiffel, Ada, BASIC, and Lisp.

### Origins & uses of Ruby

*   Ruby is an interpreted, high-level, general-purpose programming language which
    supports multiple programming paradigms. It was designed with an emphasis on
    programming productivity and simplicity. In Ruby, everything is an object,
    including primitive data types. It was developed in the mid-1990s by Yukihiro
    "Matz" Matsumoto in Japan.

*   Matsumoto describes the design of Ruby as being like a simple Lisp language at
    its core, with an object system like that of Smalltalk, blocks inspired by
    higher-order functions, and practical utility like that of Perl.

*   Uses of **Ruby**:

    *   **Web development:** Web development is one of Ruby's claims to fame
        because of the popular web development framework Ruby on Rails.

    *   **Static site generation:** Most websites use server-side code that
        generates HTML and serves it to your browser when you visit a page.

    *   **DevOps and automation:** Vagrant, written in Ruby, is a tool for
        managing virtual machines from command line. It allows developers to
        code and run projects developed for a specific operating system run on
        any operating system.

    *   **Web servers:** You can also use Ruby to build web servers. Passenger,
        Unicorn, and Puma are web servers written in Ruby.

    *   **Data processing:** Ruby's built-in map, reduce, and select functions
        are powerful tools used to solve many data processing problems.

    *   **Web scraping and crawling:** Ruby has a wide variety of packages like
        vessel & nokogiri that make extracting data from web pages a breeze.

### Scalar types and their operations

*   Scalar types in Ruby:

    *   **Strings:** A string is made up of multiple characters. They are defined
        by enclosing a set of characters within single (‘x’) or double (“x”)
        quotes.

    *   **Numbers:** A number is a series of digits that use a dot as a decimal
        mark (where one is required). Integers and floats are the two main kinds
        of numbers; Ruby can handle them both.

    *   **Booleans:** The Boolean data type represents only one bit of information
        that says whether the value is true or false. A value of this data type is
        returned when two values are compared.

### Simple input and output

*   **Ruby writing to console:**
    Ruby has several methods for printing output on the console. These methods are
    part of the Kernel module. Methods of the Kernel are available to all objects
    in Ruby.

    <!-- CODE -->

    ```ruby
    print "Apple "
    print "Apple\n"

    puts "Orange"
    puts "Orange"
    ```

    *   The **print** and **puts** methods produce textual output on the console. The difference
        between the two is that the latter(puts) adds a new line character, whereas in
        you have to explicitly add a newline("\n") character to print a newline.

    *   Ruby has 3 more methods to print outptut:
        <!-- CODE -->
        ```ruby
        p "Lemon"
        p "Lemon"

        printf "There are %d apples\n", 3

        putc 'K'
        putc 0xA
        ```
        *   The **p** calls the inspect method upon the object being printed. The method
            is useful for debugging.
        *   The **printf** method is well known from the C programming language. It
            enables string formatting.
        *   The **putc** method prints one character to the console. The second line
            prints a newline. The 0xA is a hexadecimal code for the newline
            character.

*   Ruby reading input from console
    *   The $stdin is a global variable that holds a stream for the standard
        input. It can be used to read input from the console.
        <!-- CODE -->
        ```ruby
        inp = $stdin.read
        puts inp
        ```
    *   We use the read method to read input from the console: `inp =
        $stdin.read`
    *   The read method reads data from the standard input until it reaches the
        EOF(end of the file).

### Control statements

<!-- CODE -->

*Only example snippets and outputs attached. Check the link at the end of the
section for theoretical explanation*

*   Ruby **if...else Statement:**
    ```ruby
    x = 1
    if x > 2
       puts "x is greater than 2"
    elsif x <= 2 and x!=0
       puts "x is 1"
    else
       puts "I can't guess the number"
    end
    ```
    Output: `x is 1`

*   Ruby **if modifier:**
    ```ruby
    $debug = 1
    print "debug\n" if $debug
    ```
    Output: `debug`

*   Ruby **unless Statement:**
    ```ruby
    x = 1 
    unless x>=2
       puts "x is less than 2"
     else
       puts "x is greater than 2"
    end
    ```
    Output: `x is less than 2`

*   Ruby **unless modifier:**
    ```ruby
    $var =  1
    print "1 -- Value is set\n" if $var
    print "2 -- Value is set\n" unless $var

    $var = false
    print "3 -- Value is set\n" unless $var
    ```
    Output:
    ```text
    1 -- Value is set
    3 -- Value is set
    ```

*   Ruby **case** Statement:
    ```ruby
    $age =  5
    case $age
    when 0 .. 2
       puts "baby"
    when 3 .. 6
       puts "little child"
    when 7 .. 12
       puts "child"
    when 13 .. 18
       puts "youth"
    else
       puts "adult"
    end
    ```
    Output: `little child`

*   [More Details](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/ruby/ruby_if_else.htm)

### Fundamentals of arrays

<!-- CODE -->

*   Creating arrays:
    ```ruby
    ary = [1, "two", 3.0] # Arrays in ruby are heterogenous

    # Explicitly making a new array with **new** method
    ary = Array.new    #=> []
    Array.new(3)       #=> [nil, nil, nil]
    Array.new(3, true) #=> [true, true, true]
    ```

*   Accessing Elements:
    ```ruby
    arr = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]

    # Accessing elements by indices
    arr[2]    #=> 3
    arr[100]  #=> nil
    arr[-3]   #=> 4
    arr[2, 3] #=> [3, 4, 5]
    arr[1..4] #=> [2, 3, 4, 5]
    arr[1..-3] #=> [2, 3, 4]

    # or using the "at()" method
    arr.at(0) #=> 1

    # Returns first element of the array
    arr.first #=> 1

    # Returns last element of the array
    arr.last  #=> 6

    # To return the first n elements of an array, use take
    arr.take(3) #=> [1, 2, 3]

    # Returns array length
    arr.length #=> 6

    # Checks if array is empty
    arr.empty? #=> false

    # Checks if array has the specified element
    arr.include?('3') #=> true
    ```

*   Adding elements:
    ```ruby
    arr = [1, 2, 3, 4]
    arr.push(5) #=> [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
    arr << 6    #=> [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]

    # unshift will add a new item to the beginning of an array.
    arr.unshift(0) #=> [0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]

    # Insert multiple values at once at given position using insert():
    arr.insert(3, 'orange', 'pear', 'grapefruit')
    #=> [0, 1, 2, "orange", "pear", "grapefruit", "apple", 3, 4, 5, 6]
    ```

*   Removing Items:
    ```ruby
    # The method pop removes the last element in an array and returns it:
    arr =  [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
    arr.pop #=> 6
    arr #=> [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]

    # To retrieve and at the same time remove the first item, use shift:
    arr.shift #=> 1
    arr #=> [2, 3, 4, 5]

    # To delete an element at a particular index:
    arr.delete_at(2) #=> 4
    arr #=> [2, 3, 5]
    ```

*   Iterating over arrays:
    ```ruby
    arr = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
    arr.each {|a| print a -= 10, " "}
    # prints: -9 -8 -7 -6 -5
    #=> [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
    ```

*   [More Details](https://ruby-doc.org/core-3.0.0/Array.html)

### Hashes

<!-- CODE -->

*   Creating hashes:

    ```ruby
    months = Hash.new

    # or with default value
    months = Hash.new("month")

    # or
    months = Hash.new "month"
    ```

    If the key or value doesn't exist, accessing the hash will return the
    default value:

    ```ruby
    months = Hash.new( "month" )

    puts "#{months[0]}"
    puts "#{months[72]}"
    ```

    Output:

    ```text
    month
    month
    ```

    Here, the queried keys & values exist

    ```ruby
    H = Hash["a" => 100, "b" => 200]

    puts "#{H['a']}"
    puts "#{H['b']}"
    ```

    Output:

    ```text
    100
    200
    ```

*   [More Details](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/ruby/ruby_hashes.htm)

### Methods

*   Syntax:

    ```ruby
    def method_name [( [arg [= default]]...[, * arg [, &expr ]])]
    expr..
    end
    ```

    Example:

    ```ruby
    def test(a1 = "Ruby", a2 = "Perl")
       puts "The programming language is #{a1}"
       puts "The programming language is #{a2}"
    end
    test "C", "C++"
    test
    ```

    Output:

    ```text
    The programming language is C
    The programming language is C++
    The programming language is Ruby
    The programming language is Perl
    ```

*   Class method's syntax:
    ```ruby
    class Accounts
       def reading_charge
       end
       def Accounts.return_date
       end
    end
    ```

*   Variable number of parameters: The method signature should look like:

    `def sample (*test)`

*   Ruby **alias** Statement:
    This gives alias to methods or global variables.

    `alias method-name method-alias`

*   Undefine a method: `undef method-name`

*   [More Details](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/ruby/ruby_methods.htm)

### Classes

*   Example:
    ```ruby
    class Sample
       def hello
          puts "Hello Ruby!"
       end
    end

    # now using above class to create objects
    object = Sample. new
    object.hello
    ```
    Output: `Hello Ruby!`

*   [More Details](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/ruby/ruby_classes.htm)

### Code blocks and iterators

Ruby has a concept of Block:

*   A block consists of chunks of code.

*   You assign a name to a block.

*   The code in the block is always enclosed within braces ({}).

*   A block is always invoked from a function with the same name as that of the
    block.

*   You invoke a block by using the yield statement.

*   Syntax:

    ```ruby
    block_name {
    statement1
    statement2
    ..........
    }
    ```

*   Example:

    ```ruby
    def test
       puts "You are in the method"
       yield
       puts "You are again back to the method"
       yield
    end

    test {puts "You are in the block"}
    ```

    Output:

    ```text
    You are in the method
    You are in the block
    You are again back to the method
    You are in the block
    ```

*   **Iterators** are the methods which are supported by collections(Arrays, Hashes etc.).

*   **Iterators** return all the elements of a collection one after another.

*   **Iterators** are chainable

*   There are many iterators in Ruby as follows:
    1.  Each Iterator
    2.  Collect Iterator
    3.  Times Iterator
    4.  Upto Iterator
    5.  Downto Iterator
    6.  Step Iterator
    7.  Each\_Line Iterator

*   [More Details](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/ruby-types-of-iterators/)

### Pattern matching

*   Patterns are a special syntax for matching against the structure of types, both complex and simple(Not to be confused with regex)

*   Diverse topic: [Read here](https://ruby-doc.org/core-3.0.0/doc/syntax/pattern_matching_rdoc.html)

## Introduction to Rails

*   About Rails:
    *   An extremely productive web-application framework.
    *   Written in Ruby by David Heinemeier Hansson.
    *   You could develop a web application at least ten times faster with Rails
        than you could with a typical Java framework.
    *   An open source Ruby framework for developing database-backed web
        applications.
    *   Configure your code with Database Schema.
    *   No compilation phase required.
    *   Full Stack Framework
        *   Includes everything needed to create a database-driven web application,
            using the Model-View-Controller pattern.
        *   Being a full-stack framework means all the layers are built to work
            seamlessly together with less code.
        *   Requires fewer lines of code than other frameworks.

### Overview of Rails

*   Rails is packed with features that make you more productive, with many of
    the following features building on one other.
    *   **Metaprogramming:**
        Where other frameworks use extensive code generation from scratch, Rail
        framework uses Metaprogramming techniques to write programs. Ruby is one
        of the best languages for Metaprogramming, and Rails uses this capability
        well. Rails also uses code generation but relies much more on
        Metaprogramming for the heavy lifting.
    *   **Active Record:**
        Rails introduces the Active Record framework, which saves objects into the
        database. The Rails version of the Active Record discovers the columns in
        a database schema and automatically attaches them to your domain objects
        using metaprogramming.
    *   **Convention over configuration:**
        Most web development frameworks for .NET or Java force you to write pages
        of configuration code. If you follow the suggested naming conventions,
        Rails doesn't need much configuration.
    *   **Scaffolding:**
        You often create temporary code in the early stages of development to help
        get an application up quickly and see how major components work together.
        Rails automatically creates much of the scaffolding you'll need.
    *   **Built-in testing:**
        Rails creates simple automated tests you can then extend. Rails also
        provides supporting code called harnesses and fixtures that make test
        cases easier to write and run. Ruby can then execute all your automated
        tests with the rake utility.
    *   **Three environments:**
        Rails gives you three default environments: development, testing, and
        production. Each behaves slightly differently, making your entire software
        development cycle easier. For example, Rails creates a fresh copy of the
        Test database for each test run.

<!-- TODO: A lot of refactoring below -->

*Section Below* **NEEDS REFACTORING**

### Document Requests

[Read here](https://www.twilio.com/blog/5-ways-make-http-requests-ruby)

### Processing Forms

[Read here](https://codecabulary.launchacademy.com/learn-rails/writing-forms)

### Rails Applications and Databases

[Read here](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/ruby-on-rails/rails-database-setup.htm)

### Layouts

[Read here](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/ruby-on-rails/rails-layouts.htm)

### Rails with Ajax

How Rails Implements Ajax

*   Rails has a simple, consistent model for how it implements Ajax operations.
    Once the browser has rendered and displayed the initial web page, different
    user actions cause it to display a new web page (like any traditional web
    application) or trigger an Ajax operation −

*   Some trigger fires − This trigger could be the user clicking on a button or
    link, the user making changes to the data on a form or in a field, or just a
    periodic trigger (based on a timer).

*   The web client calls the server − A JavaScript method, XMLHttpRequest, sends
    data associated with the trigger to an action handler on the server. The
    data might be the ID of a checkbox, the text in an entry field, or a whole
    form.

*   The server does processing − The server-side action handler ( Rails
    controller action )-- does something with the data and returns an HTML
    fragment to the web client.

*   The client receives the response − The client-side JavaScript, which Rails
    creates automatically, receives the HTML fragment and uses it to update a
    specified part of the current page's HTML, often the content of a <div> tag.

*   These steps are the simplest way to use Ajax in a Rails application, but
    with a little extra work, you can have the server return any kind of data in
    response to an Ajax request, and you can create custom JavaScript in the
    browser to perform more involved interactions.

*   [More
    Details](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/ruby-on-rails/rails-and-ajax.htm)

## Introduction to EJB

*   **EJB** is a server-side software component that encapsulates business logic
    of an application. An EJB web container provides a runtime environment for
    web related software components, including computer security, Java servlet
    lifecycle management, transaction processing, and other web services.

*   When to use Enterprise Java Beans?
    1.  Application needs Remote Access. In other words, it is distributed.
    2.  Application needs to be scalable. EJB applications supports load
        balancing, clustering and fail-over.
    3.  Application needs encapsulated business logic. EJB application is
        differentiated from demonstration and persistent layer.

*   Advantages of Enterprise Java Beans
    1.  EJB repository yields system-level services to enterprise beans, the
        bean developer can focus on solving business problems.
    2.  The beans rather than the clients contain the application’s business
        logic, the client developer can focus on the presentation of the client. The
        client developer does not have to code the pattern that execute business
        rules or access databases.
    3.  Enterprise Java Beans are portable elements, the application assembler
        can build new applications from the beans that already exists.

*   Disadvantages of Enterprise Java Beans
    1.  Requires application server
    2.  Requires only java client. For other language client, you need to go for
        webservice.
    3.  Complex to understand and develop EJB applications.

*   The 3 Types of Enterprise Java Beans are:
    1.  **Session Bean:** Session bean contains business logic that can be
        invoked by local, remote or webservice client. There are two types of
        session beans:
        1.  Stateful Session bean : Stateful session bean performs business task
            with the help of a state.
        2.  Stateless Session bean : Stateless session bean implement business
            logic without having a persistent storage mechanism, such as a state or
            database and can used shared data.
    2.  **Message Driven Bean:** Like Session Bean, it contains the business
        logic but it is invoked by passing message.
    3.  **Entity Bean:** It summarizes the state that can be remained in the
        database. It is deprecated. Now, it is replaced with JPA (Java Persistent
        API). There are two types of entity bean:
        1.  Bean Managed Persistence : In a bean managed persistence type of
            entity bean, the programmer has to write the code for database calls. It
            persists across multiple sessions and multiple clients.
        2.  Container Managed Persistence : Container managed persistence are
            enterprise bean that persists across database. In container managed
            persistence the container take care of database calls.

*   [Please also
    refer](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/enterprise-java-beans-ejb/)
